---
layout: post
status: draft
publish: false
title: "Why you should start blogging now"
categories: []
tags: []
---

> Translator note: This post is a translation of an old blog post from
> mindhacks.cn , so that my friends whose Chinese aren't that fluent can have a
> taste of this article. Original post URL:
> <http://mindhacks.cn/2009/02/15/why-you-should-start-blogging-now/>

# 1) Why you should blog (starting right now)

In a nutshell, **keeping a blog has many benefits, while no obvious
downsides**.

Let me put this down in more detail: **Recording your valueable thoughts in the
form of a blog can bring many benefits, but doesn't do any harm**. Note: things
like mumbling about trivialities, making miscellaneous emotional dumps, or 
writing for
the sake of writing etc. -- these don't count as valueable thoughts.

Here's in my opinion a few of the greatest benefits of keeping a long-term
blog:

**1) You can find friends of similar ambitions.** While I write my own blog, I 
read others' blogs too. In this Information Era, perhaps one of people's most 
important channels of getting to know more friends is through the internet.  But 
through the wire, how would we be able to tell whether the other person has 
common interests with ourselves? Trying to do such distinguishment by reading 
through unorganized SNS posts seems far too inefficient. The friends of mine 
whom I admire almost all use blogs as a long-term effort for recording thoughts; 
**hence even if we haven't met in a long time, we can still know each others' 
thoughts very well.** Even friends whom I haven't met in person before might 
inspire enjoyable conversations when we meet.

Why does blogging far outrun primitive conversational methods when it comes to 
the efficiency of getting to know people whom you share common ambitions with?  
It's quite simple: **Firstly, blogs are free of geographical limitations. On the 
internet, the distance between any two nodes is always just one hyperlink 
away,** while the usual ways of making friends are limited to where in the 
physical world you happen to live. Secondly, and more importantly, if we make 
friends the conventional way, we'll need to have conversations with each other, 
share thoughts, gradually get familiar with each other -- which could very well 
be a long process. What's worse, is when you meet _another_ stranger, you'll 
have to repeat the whole process again, just to reiterate whatever it is that 
you've talked about with your many old friends years back. Blogging achieves 
**"write once, read everywhere"**. Whenever I've read a blog which someone has 
been keeping for many years, I always feel as though I've had conversations with 
that person and known him/her very well. **As programmers would put it -- 
"blogging greatly increases the reusability of language".** 

[I've kept a blog on CSDN for nearly six 
years](http://mindhacks.cn/former-life-of-mindhacks/) , and created a Google 
Groups group ([TopLanguage](https://groups.google.com/group/pongba)).  Due to 
the fact that my long-time blog readers already share quite a lot in common 
(amongst themselves, and with me), TopLanguage has seen enthusiastic 
conversations right from its beginning. And because the technical discussions 
there seems to quite inspiring, more people gradually joined in; and so the 
snowball started rolling. In about a year and a half, I've learnt many things 
from reading discussions in this group [1]. For those who aren't programmers, 
[SongShuHui](http://songshuhui.net/) is a good example of a helpful community 
similar TopLanguage.

**2) Writing is better thinking.** I summarized the good things about writing in 
[*Writing is better 
thinking.*](http://mindhacks.cn/2009/02/09/writing-is-better-thinking/), so I 
won't copy and paste it here. The thing about our thinking process is, that if 
we don't make a note of thoughts, they'll just slip away. In [*Anecdotes of 
maths geniuses*](http://blog.csdn.net/fgs2008/article/details/570561) (honour 
belongs to ukim), there's this story about Hilbert: Once in a seminar of 
Hilbert's, a young man used an elegant theorem in his talk. Hilbert said, "This 
is a really beautiful ("wunderbaschon") theorem. Who discovered it?" The young 
man was confused: "It's you, sir..."

**3) Teaching is the best learning.** [If you're not able to explain something 
clearly, there's a fair chance you haven't actually mastered 
it.](https://groups.google.com/group/pongba/browse_frm/thread/6f6140744ab95c72/) 
You'll likely have heard that in the software industry's interviews, the 
interviewer often asks you to explain something to him, while saying that he/she 
"doesn't know about it beforehand", and your job is to explain until he/she gets 
it.  (The effect is more obvious when he/she *really* doesn't know about the 
topic beforehad.)

In order to turn someone who "doesn't get it" into someone who "does", you must
know exactly which concepts are the ones that needs to be mastered to get one
from "not getting it" to "getting it". This forces you to turn your tree of
knowledge upside-down, look at your knowledge "under the hood", and **dig out
all those knowledge you took for granted and those assumptions you made without
realising**, and move them from [Implicit 
Memory](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Implicit_memory) to [Explicit 
Memory](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Explicit_memory). Only a person who knows, 
**and knows that he knows**, all the frames down the stack of abstraction, would 
be able to give [an explanation that's crystal 
clear](http://mindhacks.cn/2008/07/07/the-importance-of-knowing-why/).

But then you might wonder: apart from being able to explain things clearly,
what's so good about knowing which things you know? After all, one might not
bother making the effort unless he/she want to be a teacher.

[sagasw](http://sunxiunan.com/) on TopLanguage once told us this little story: 
**in a famous software company, a teddy bear can be found on the desks of each 
developer. Before asking each other a question, everyone first phrases the 
question to the teddy bear, to see whether the question can be put into a 
sentence yet. It endded up oftening being the case that once the question is 
clearly worded, the answer came naturally.** Of course, you don't *have to* talk 
to the *teddy bear* -- you can simply imagine a person who knows little about 
your topic, and try explaining stuff to him. This is practicable; I often do so 
when I'm on the road. But if you're seated at a desk, I suggest that you give 
your words to an actual audience -- for example, write down your thinking, 
because [writing is better 
thinking](http://mindhacks.cn/2009/02/09/writing-is-better-thinking/).

Most of our knowledge is hidden in our subconsciousness most of the time, 
because our window of consciousness is very small, and our working memory can 
only fit few entries. (Remember the sort of Flash minigame where you try to 
memorize as many as possible simultaneously flashing numbers on the screen?) 
[Most of the time our reasoning process is done 
automatically](http://www.douban.com/subject/1005576/), taking place in our 
subconsciousness, automatically -- and we can only sense the existance of few 
intermidiate corollaries. Try it our yourself: count the number of times you had 
a discussion with someone where you were thinking **"Well it's quite obvious to 
me that's statement X is true. However if you ask me why it's true though, it 
would actuall take me quite a while to figure out the reason."** **Doesn't it 
bother you? If your propositions can't even be logically supported by yourself, 
how would you be so sure that it's indeed true?  Simply because your hunch tells 
you so? Well then what happens if a person standing right next to you has a 
conflicting "hunch" on the matter, and *he* says that he's sure that *he's* 
right? "His hunch is wrong, while my hunch is correct"? So you're really that 
confident of your intuition?**

I don't know about you, but I for one **cherish moments like these** -- namely 
moments when "I strongly feel that it's true, but I can't explain why". It's 
moments like these that your brain is **running around places, looking 
everywhere, trying to put together all the pieces of the puzzle, questioning the 
obvious, correcting false assumptions, and working things all out.** On the 
other hand, moments when you think **"I really think there's something wrong 
about this statement, but I don't know *what*"** are also extremely cherishable 
moments, because it almost always means that you're holding a certain bias or 
contradiction, having certain misunderstandings of the matter, having 
unknowingly introduced an underlying assumption that doesn't actually hold, or 
swapped out an important concept with your own interpretation etc. It's exactly 
during moments like these that you're deep in conflict and reflection. When 
you've dug to the roots, and seen the whole iceberg beneath the surface, you 
will have this grand sense of achievement and satisfaction for finally knowing 
how you knew what you know.

Why did I mention the above? I've been saying that we should make good use of 
such chances of reflection. But **if you regularly summarize your system of 
knowledge, and write it out for your readers, you'll find that you're creating 
those chances by yourself, for yourself**. If you don't reflect enough in our 
day-to-day life, you'll consider many things "obvious"; but as soon as you need 
to explain it to someone, you'll immediately realise that the whole thing ain't 
so "obvious" afterall. As you try to explain, you'll find yourself using the 
word "anyway" before you even notice.

And so the opportunity of reflection arose.

**As soon as you strat digging thoughts and beliefs out from the back of your 
mind, you have the chance of direcly facing them, and hence reflecting upon 
them, instead of letting them steer your judgement subconsciouslyp** Oftentimes 
when there's a flaw in our reasoning, it's not because we can't introspect, but 
instead because we don't know our hidden assumptions. **How would you know what 
has gone wrong, if you didn't know the reasoning your brain did before arriving 
at the conclusion?** On the other hand, once we figure out the logical process 
we've gone through to get to the conclusion, we won't be too far away from 
finding the error in it -- if a person who's debating with you only ever states 
his position without giving any justification, you'll find it hard to debate 
with him; whereas if he exposes to you the process of his reasoning, it'll be a 
much easier job for you to criticise his logic. (And for the exact same reason, 
some people like to hide their reasoning, rather than show them to us.)

Most of the time [we reach conclusions without much deliberate thinking, like a 
wound-up piece of clockwork](http://book.douban.com/subject/1005576/), while we 
don't really know how these conclusions are reached, or what was going on behind 
the scenes of our automatic thoughts. Hence when we discover that our conclusion 
is wrong, we're lost, not able to find the "bug" that caused it. If you pay 
close attention to peoples' sayings (blogs, forums etc.), and split their prose 
into "pre-condition", "assumption", "proof", "conclusion", you'll soon realise 
that most of what most people do is stating conclusions (i.e. declaring 
positions), with little trace of pre-conditions, assumptions, or the logical 
deduction required in proofs. It's usually not that they really aren't willing 
to write down their logic; it's just that inspecting one's own thought process 
is a really difficult thing to do. Too much of our reasoning happen "under the 
water" -- only the few noteworthy conclusions bubble to the surface, which we're 
then able to grasp. And this hasn't even taken into account that we usually 
actually end up using a [thought 
shortcut](http://www.douban.com/subject/1005576/) instead of a proper, complete 
chain of logic.

**To teach an oblivious(?) learner is the strongest way to reflect** -- because 
he doesn't have any preparatory knowledge. In order to let him understand what 
you understand, you must completely decompose your tree of knowledge, figure out 
the foundations on which this whole theory is build, where its "load-bearing 
walls" are, and how it's "laid out brick by brick". You can't just stand on 
floor 11, assume that your reader is on floor 10, and hope that just by telling 
him what's between floor 10 and floor 11 that you'd be able to enlighten him.  
**Your reader is always standing on the ground floor**. You have to know how all 
those 11 floors beneath you are built. **This is what requires you to perform a 
complete, thorough re-examination of all that you've mastered, or all the 
theories that you *thought* was correct. The more innocent and oblivious your 
audience is, the deeper your introspection would need to be.**

**4) Discussion is excellent reflection.** Sometimes we don't *actually* want to 
explain stuff to someone who has *no idea at all* about your topic -- in fact, 
we often end up explaining things to our peers in the same field anyway. It's 
not true that in this case there's no more "reflection" that needs to happen -- 
you'll in fact realise that if you publicise your ideas, you'll **most likely 
run into people who hold different or opposite opinions** disagreeing with you, 
and **by comparing your view with theirs**, you'll realise that there are often 
divergences right at the beginning of the chains of thoughts of the two of you. 
Now the natural question is: "What caused this divergence?" **As the discussion 
between you two progesses deeper, you're each forced by each other to show 
deeper reasoning and understanding**. Besides "explaining to an outsider", these 
discussions are also an effective way of encouraging yourself to reflect. The 
deeper the discussion and questioning goes, the closer you'll be from the 
essence of the issue, the more likely it'll be that you discover hidden 
differences in the thought processes of the two fo you that you'll likely 
overlook otherwise.  **And so you'll have had another valueable chance to 
inspect your own knowledge system in seek of incorrect information or flawed 
logic.**

**5) It encourages you to continue learning and thinking.** If you didn't have a 
habit of persistently learning and thinking, your blog would soon run out of 
topics, or just end up being a record of daily trivialities or reposts of blog 
posts from other bloggers. Your readers would leave, you would end up closing 
down your blog, then you'd also give up blogging altogether, and you'd discover 
that there's now one less way of encouraging yourself to reflect, and then you'd 
be even less keen on reflecting and summarizing, and then...

Don't get caught in such a vicious circle. Don't decide to permanently stop 
blogging. Even if you don't publish any posts for two or three months, as long 
as every post in your blog is the outcome of meaningful thinking you've done, 
your blog will be found valueable by others on the internet -- because lots of 
information aggregation platforms are begging to find valueable content like 
yours. There are search engines there to provide a vast potential audience to 
your content; there are also humans who are looking for, and forwarding 
meaningful content like yours. **The worst decision you can make is to stop 
doing something that doesn't cause any harm, but does various goods.**

In order to make your blog valueable, you must continuously summarise what
you've learnt; you must think continuously, reveal deeper truths, and pose
independent opinions. This might seem like some upside-down logic -- weren't we 
blogging to help ourselves think in the first place? Don't worry, it will all
make sense soon.

**6) It's a chance for you to learn to do something persistently.** Lots of 
people feel lost in life, not knowing what to do. This is because they haven't 
found a thing they can persistently do. In the terms from [Positive 
Psychology](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Positive_psychology), these people 
haven't found activities in which they can experience 
[Flow](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flow_(psychology)). Writing down one's own 
thoughts seems to be something that often creates a flow experience. This is 
especially true when it comes to writing rationally: the brain enters a "logical 
analysis" mode, and all unhappy emotions and frustration silently fades away. 
But then again, the pre-condition of the whole thing is that you *start* 
writing. After you've made it through the most difficult starting period, it 
will soon all just come naturally to you.

**7) A long-term blog is the best CV.** Here, "CV" doesn't specifically mean the 
piece of document you use when seeking a job. After all, it's currently not yet 
the **era of valueable blogs** -- most people are just re-blogging articles from 
around the internet, or just posting trivialities; hence the interviewer 
wouldn't really take personal blogs as a serious, reliable means of knowing more 
about the applicant. Here, "CV" is a channel through which other people can get 
to know you. Although one might not be able to make one's blog a pillar of one's 
career like [Yonghao 
Luo](http://zh.wikipedia.org/wiki/%E7%BD%97%E6%B0%B8%E6%B5%A9) or 
[Keso](http://about.me/keso) (who made [5gme (translator note: now 
obsoleted)](http://www.douban.com/group/on_the_road/)) has done, at least **you 
can get to know more people because of blogging. The more valueable your blog 
is, the more _capable_(?) the people you get to know in this way would be, and 
the more your knowledge horizon would extend.  You'll then be able to grasp more 
opportunities and jump to touch more of your goals, and then you'll gradually 
become more _capable_ yourself as well... This is a virtuous cycle.**

# 2) How to keep a long-term valueable blog

It's worth noting that I didn't mean anything about "perseverance" -- when
thinking, summarising and externalising has become a habit, putting thoughts
down into words and in return using words to assist thinking would have already
become a habit too. Thoughts will be begging to be written down -- the blog
itself will have become merely a by-product.

At first you think long and hard about things, trying to summarise thoughts
into words so that you have a blog post, hoping to let people feel a bit of
novelty.  Later down the path, because you're accustomed to thinking and
reflecting, and because you realise that writing is better thinking, you just
_have to_ turn your thought process into words. Up to this point, the purposes
will finally start to seem the right way around -- we're not trying to assist
blogging by thinking, but rather assist thinking by blogging.

Well then how do we pull off this long term effort? I can imagine people giving
various little techniques as advice to bring more motivation and inspiration,
e.g. how to do better SEO, how to encourage readers' interaction etc.. I need
not mention all of those; I will only mention what's in my opinion the most
important thing:

> Become a person who persistently learns and contemplates. Write only the
> outcomes of true thought. All the rest will fit themselves in place.

This is in the same spirit as the rather well-known saying that "Do what you
love; the money will follow".[^2]

There are lots of examples around this topic; I'll save the effort of listing
them. What I need to re-emphasise is that: whatever you do, do _not_ post
trivial chat and small talk. I can appreciate the urge to sometimes rant about
stuff, but now there is a perfect medium for that -- Twitter. Stop posting
things on your blog that did _not_ come from sufficient thought on your side.
Think "think long and hard". Readers who subscribe to your blog wish to receive
_signal_, not _noise_.  **If you really can't help but want to talk about those
trivialities, step into others' shoes and think to yourself: if they wrote such
a piece on _their_ blog, would _you_ want to spent your time reading and
filtering through it?**

# 3) Possible problems, and some strategies for coping with them

Even though the prose above gave lots of reasons why _to_ write a blog, 
sometimes all it needs to take to hold a potential blogger back is just one 
reason to _not blog_. As mentioned in the fifth chapter of _Influencer: The 
Power to Change Anything_ [^3][] 
[amazon](http://www.amazon.cn/Influencer-The-Power-to-Change-Anything-Kerry-Patterson/dp/007148499X/) 
[douban](http://book.douban.com/subject/3130904/) 
[one-amazon](http://www.amazon.com/Influence-Psychology-Persuasion-Revised-Edition/dp/006124189X/) 
[one-douban](http://book.douban.com/subject/1005576/) -- "Much of will is 
skill". **Whether or not you're can be determined enough largely depends on your 
methodology.**

**1) Worrying that people consider your blog is not valueable.** The problems 
that you face would more likely than not to have been faced by others before 
too. If you put your independent thinking into the issue, the outcome is pretty 
much valueable by definition. Of course, it wouldn't be a surprise that there 
may be people who really _does just already know_ what you're talking about in 
your blog post; but then however "smart" you are, there's always going to be 
people who're "smarter". We shouldn't reject recording our thoughts just because 
there are "smarter" people out there; good understanding of a topic always only 
comes after one's own thought. Besides, even if other people has thought about a 
certain topic, there's always aspects of the topic that aren't yet covered, 
thoughts people haven't thought. When putting thought into things has become a 
habit, your ability to think and analyse things will steadily grow, and your 
blog posts will become steadily more valueable. Let me repeat this: **Whatever 
problem you're facing, must have been faced by others already.  Whatever comes 
out of your long and hard thinking will always be valueable to many.**

It is also possible that **after you've "figured it out", you consider that 
"this topic is actually really simple", and "not worthy of a blog post"**. Be 
aware, that problems always seem "simple" when you've already "got it". It's not 
how difficult the problem seems in hindsight that matters -- it's **how much 
process it requires you to go through before you can get from confused to 
clear** that counts. The more time and effort it took you to make that 
transition, the more people out there would we expect to not have done the same.  
The harder the task, the fewer the conquerors.

Although if I now look back at articles I wrote a year ago, I might think 
they're immature or incomplete in their thinking, if it weren't through such a 
process of writing, thinking and repeating that I've gone through, I wouldn't 
have arrived at the position today at which I can make such comments in 
hindsight. In the same way, it's quite likely that when in a few years' time I 
look back at my writings today, they will seem similarly "immature" and 
"incomplete".

**2) Worrying that your thoughts are too naîve or flawed and that others will
laugh at it.** We're all human; we make mistakes. It's exactly because an
individual's thought is almost always incomplete, that we should share our
thinking and fill in each other's cracks. The possibility of your mistakes
being pointed out is exactly what's required to reduce them and improve.
Thoughts that are always hidden behind your back and never spoken of will never
become mature.

"Much of intelligence is knowledge." There is a thought-provoking [TODO][TODO]
pyschology experiment [^4][]:

> Split some children into two groups, and give them different reading
> material.  For one group, give material that claims intelligence is innate,
> and un-change-able via effort. For the other group, give material that claims
> "intelligence" is just another word to mean knowledge and skill, and is
> entirely dependent on one's effort. Subsequently, the children are asked to
> perform a set of tasks. Those in the innate-intelligence group tend to avoid
> difficult tasks and pick the easy ones. We can imagine the logic going on:
> "If I pick the difficult tasks, the probablity of failure will be larger, and
> I will give others the impression that I am of less intelligence. In order to
> avoid my apparent intelligence level from decreasing, I should avoid those
> tasks that I'm more likely to fail at." Children from the other group tend to
> be more willing at attempting the more challenging tasks, and is noticeably
> less disheartened than those from the first group when faced with failure --
> because even if the task resulted in a failure, more knowledge, skill and
> experience is gained in the process, and the level of intelligence must have
> increased either way.

Besides, those who only know to criticise or even ridicule others are the least
helpful people. Just ignore them.

**3) Worrying that you aren't getting reward.** This is actually a rather
irrelevant question. Only blogs that talk about nothing but trivialities would
face such a concern. If what you write down is your own thinking, then just the
fact that you've thought about it carefully enough such that you're able to
write it down is itself already supposed to be a rewarding thing, even if you
were to write it in your private little notebook. Besides, if you are authoring
a valueable blog, you shouldn't worry at all about its popularity. Maybe in the
beginning it would start out small, but that's a necessary step of the process.  
Both [Paul Buchheit](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paul_Buchheit), a core member 
of the Gmail team and the founder of FriendFeed, and Jeff Atwood have exclaimed: 
"Overnight success takes a long time." 
([(1)](http://paulbuchheit.blogspot.com/2009/01/overnight-success-takes-long-time.html), 
[(2)](http://blog.codinghorror.com/overnight-success-it-takes-years/)). However 
nowadays, there are more and more information aggregation services on the 
internet, some where humans do the work, some where bots do; from the viewpoint 
of idendipendent bloggers, the situation is favourable and encouraging, and
it's even still getting better.

**4) Worrying that you've got nothing to write about.** This is also quite an
irrelevant concern. The process of thinking is not one you can rush on. Those
who subscribe to my blog long-term will know that my publishing frequency is
about 3 to 5 posts per month. In fact sometimes I don't have anything published
for months. The reason behind such delays is simple: either I've got urgent
work at hand that I need to deal with before some deadline, or that the
problems I was facing were big ones, which would require more time and more
thought into them. It doesn't really matter that you keep your blog quiet while
you think carefully -- if you don't feel like you've thought enough for a blog
post, just keep working at it until you're ready. There's a difference between
those who are keen on thinking and those who aren't: the former always has a
few topics floating at the back of their mind, which comes out to centre stage
and demands thought whenever the mind has its moments of pause; the latter
doesn't have such floating topics -- they don't even pro-actively think about
anything, and even always tries to let others "help" them do the thinking for
them when they're faced with a difficulty.

It's ok to spend some more time and learn to think slowly. Dig deep on a topic,
and you'll always find edges and corners overlooked by others. The longer you
can leave a question floating in your mind, the more likely it is that you
discover new things about the topic. Usually, for questions which I consider
valueable, I would keep thinking about it intermittently, consciously or
subconsciouslyl, for some period of time, ranging from a week to a month,
depending on the difficulty/complexity of the issue, and use the free time when
I walk, eat to think about the issue. (I've discovered that many people who I
admire have similar thinking habits.) **Sometimes even when I thought I've
thought enough about it and wrote and published an article on an issue, my mind
still has the inertia of thinking about it subconsciously; and hence when I
then come across a certain article or book I would again be struck with new
ideas and sentiments.**

**The ability of letting questions linger in one's subconsciousness is a
capability that can bring great benefits. The longer the thinking has happened
in your head, the more you'd be able to see compared to others.** Only by
observing the world around us _while we are holding thoughts_ would we be able
to make new discoveries. The typical example is Archimedes' "Eureka!" moment --
if he hadn't keep thinking about the same question during his "down time" for a
long period, how would he have been able to come to the realisation of "using
the volume of displaced water to measure volume"? -- Otherwise he would've long
discovered this techinique through years of taking baths.

Therefore, if you have formed the habit of thinking, you will always have
things to write about, things to summarise, which will in turn inspire more
thought.

Of course another technique you can try is to write down those
thought-in-progress's themselves, and try to organise them into words of
clarity, and see what new thoughts and conclusions you can draw by going
through this process. This is often viable. For instance, this article was once
only three mere lines in my notebook (each containing around ten keywords) --
and the initial question was just yet-another-thought I had while walking
around: "Why should anyone blog?"
